JavaScript is a scripting or programming language that allows you to implement complex features on web pages — every time a web page does more than just sit there and display static information for you to look at — displaying timely content updates, interactive maps, animated 2D/3D graphics, scrolling video jukeboxes, etc. — you can bet that JavaScript is probably involved. It is the third layer of the layer cake of standard web technologies, two of which (HTML and CSS) we have covered in much more detail in other parts of the Learning Area.

jQuery is a fast, small, and feature-rich JavaScript library. It makes things like HTML document traversal and manipulation, event handling, animation, and Ajax much simpler with an easy-to-use API that works across a multitude of browsers. With a combination of versatility and extensibility, jQuery has changed the way that millions of people write JavaScript.

AJAX, short for Asynchronous JavaScript And XML, allows you to load data in the background and display it on your webpage, without refreshing the page. This allows you to create websites with much richer functionality. Popular web applications like Gmail, Outlook Web Access, and Google Maps uses AJAX extensively, to provide you with a more responsive, desktop-like experience.

Using AJAX can be a bit cumbersome, because the various browsers have different implementations to support AJAX. Normally this would force you to write code to respond differently, depending on the browser, but fortunately, jQuery has done this for us, which allows us to write AJAX functionality with as little as a single line of code.
